---
layout: post
title: "XnaToFna X360 week 1: Basic games are booting"
description: "Yet another XnaToFna status update, this time about bringing (a very small subset of) Xbox 360 games to PC."
date: 2017-10-26 10:46 +0100
categories: post
tags: --migrate --update X360 XnaToFna
---
{% assign srcid = page.path | remove: '_posts/' | remove: '.md' %}
{% capture media %}/media/{{ srcid }}{% endcapture %}

*Note: This post was manually migrated from [https://www.patreon.com/posts/xnatofna-x360-1-15056085](https://www.patreon.com/posts/xnatofna-x360-1-15056085)*

Yet another XnaToFna status update, this time about bringing (a very small subset of) Xbox 360 games to PC.

<!-- MORE -->


# Notes:
I'll be in Hamburg from 27.10. to 29.10. to participate in the InnoGames Game Jam. I won't be able to work on XnaToFna or any other projects during that time.

[Iced Lizard Games have donated a good bunch of their games to me](https://twitter.com/IcedLizardGames/status/921456574706700288), including the X360, Windows builds and the sources to help me with this project. If you're reading this, you're the reason this project is "rolling." I can't thank you enough!

Technically, I'm just gluing puzzle pieces together, just gluing together all the work that went into reverse engineering XNA, XACT, xWMA, XMA2 and anything related to that.

Many thanks to [Ethan "flibitijibibo" Lee](https://www.patreon.com/flibitijibibo), [Luigi "aluigi" Auriemma](http://aluigi.altervista.org/papers.htm#xbox) and [Andrew "fesh0r" McRae](https://github.com/fesh0r/xnb_parse)! This wouldn't be possible without FNA itself, FACT (accurate XACT reimplementation), unxwb (base for the implementation in MonoGame / FNA) and xnb_parse (helped me in understanding the XMA2 fmt chunk). 


# 20. October:
[The first XBLIG XNA 4.0 game to boot with FNA: "Death vs. The IRS"](https://twitter.com/0x0ade/status/921486706334937088), an unreleased game by Iced Lizard Games. This was achieved by using the Windows build content. Until later this week, XnaToFna wasn't able to deal with X360 content at all.

Getting the game to boot required a few changes in XnaToFna, [especially regarding the relink mapping.](https://github.com/0x0ade/XnaToFna/blob/204a3190fbe42cd89f55e17cd171b0005a61af56/src/XnaToFnaUtil.cs#L27)  
If you didn't know, XNA is split up into a dozen assemblies, ranging from  Microsoft.Xna.Framework.Avatar to Microsoft.Xna.Framework.Xact. This also includes .GamerServices and .Net.  
Meanwhile, FNA is a single assembly solution. This isn't an issue... unless you're using .GamerServices (GS in the following text) or .Net. Also .Input.Touch, which will return in FNA soonish, and .Avatar, which... let's just face it, it won't work out unless a magician brings X360 avatars to the PC or unless we stub it.

Unfortunately, XBLIG games contain GS references pointing towards Microsoft.Xna.Framework, not .GS. This is an issue for XnaToFna as its relink maps are on an assembly level...

... but fortunately, it was easily fixed by just making XnaToFna feed additional relink mappings for each type in the .GS replacement. This forces MonoMod to relink any GS reference pointing towards any assembly to be forcibly mapped to the .GS replacement.

Right now XnaToFna supports MonoGame.Framework.Net and FNA.Steamworks as .GS replacements. Latter is untested, it'll probably burn down, but it may be fun to see in the future if X360 builds can "replace" Steam builds in the future. (Prediction: Hell no, but I still want to try.)

But that's not all! XBLIG XNA games use the ".NET Compact Framework", which has got a [different public token (per game?!), a different assembly version and offers a special thread affinity method for X360 only.](https://github.com/0x0ade/XnaToFna/compare/7074096e7152296d495a3bf1d3ab86a11737fc84...0x0ade:8c86d35cda345f48bc92e17a9684e7e523b93705) XnaToFna now "fixes" the game token and version and offers a SetProcessorAffinity stub.


# 21. - 23. October:
> "So many endian swaps we’re going to want to gouge our eyes out~"  
[-- Ethan "flibitijibibo" Lee, 2017 ](https://twitter.com/flibitijibibo/status/921487599671357441)  

The next two days were spent with making XnaToFna swap bits around.  
Literally.

Nothing "interesting" happened, except for figuring out how to feed a XMA2 header to ffmpeg. XnaToFna uses ffmpeg to convert unsupported audio / video formats to FNA-compatible ones and the wavebanks only deliver what effectively is the RIFF "data" chunk. It stores the metadata separately. XnaToFna thus needs to recreate the "fmt " chunk.

The result: ["Mute Crimson" for the X360 (not the plus version) running on PC... although with graphics issues.](https://twitter.com/0x0ade/status/922434417863389184)


# 24. October:
Spent the day with getting [FNA to read X360-formatted textures](https://github.com/FNA-XNA/FNA/pull/135), fixing a backup restoration bug in XnaToFna (missing "mkdirs") and fixing an edge case in the opcode short <-> long converter. sbyte.MinValue is -128, but that already is invali~

...

While writing this update report, I just noticed a bug I introduced while trying to fix the above opcode bug. The first "long" value seems to be -127, but I forgot the negative sign. This technically doesn't introduce any bug in the patched game but only removes an optimization.


# 25. October:
I haven't had much time to work on this project yesterday, but the time I had for it went into figuring out how to make XnaToFna read and transform XNBs.

My current plan: XnaToFna starts a "game", hooks onto the ContentManager / ContentReader at runtime using the MonoMod runtime detourer, hard-replaces some content type readers with custom "transformers" and copies everything it reads into a second stream. When required, the transformer disables copying everything, reads the "unsupported" data, writes the supported data, re-enables copying and moves on. This also requires XnaToFna to decompress every XNB.

This is required to convert SoundEffects from big-endian XMA2 to little-endian PCM.

If I won't be able to finish it today (26. October), I'll continue working on it next week once I'm home from the InnoGames Game Jam.


# 26. October _[Edited]_
Just a small edit: I actually got it working today! XnaToFna can now transform XNBs and convert XMA2 sound effects. Check the comment in the GitHub discussion issue for technical details: [https://github.com/0x0ade/XnaToFna/issues/3#issuecomment-339791487](https://github.com/0x0ade/XnaToFna/issues/3#issuecomment-339791487)


# Ending notes
Thank you, Ryan Kistner, Merlijn Sebrechts, razing32 and Chad Yates for supporting me!  
I'm currently saving money in case I end up offline again, but I'm still open to game suggestions.

The DuckGame-Linux hackport was a success (the developer acknowledged it and it works on more than just my machine™) but unfortunately the Underrail hackport failed due to an issue that's (seemingly) out of my control. I'll revisit it once I have a clue what's going on.
In the meantime, I can still try to hackport another game to Linux. After all, any XnaToFna bug / missing feature can affect more than the game it's noticed on, even if it hasn't been noticed before.

You can also [follow the development of XnaToFna X360 on GitHub.](https://github.com/0x0ade/XnaToFna/issues/3)
